#+BEGIN_abstract
You're certain the price of that stock will take off—your broker says so---but 
you don't want to commit all your money just yet. What are your options?
#+END_abstract

#+TITLE: Dynamic Programming for Fun and Profit
#+DATE: 2018-03-08
#+FILETAGS: :options:dynamic-programming:
#+TOC_NO_HEADING:t

** Introduction
   :PROPERTIES:
   :CUSTOM_ID: introduction
   :END:

You've just figured out that the coming olive harvest will be a bumper
crop. With only a little money, how can you profit from this
information? Aristotle
[[http://www.perseus.tufts.edu/hopper/text?doc=Perseus%3Atext%3A1999.01.0058%3Abook%3D1%3Asection%3D1259a][tells
the story]] of Thales of Miletus who, with a minor down payment, secured
a limited monopoly on a large number of olive presses. When the harvest
came in, he was able to rent out use of his presses at a significant
profit. The wise philosopher's maneuver is an early example of an
/option/.

An option is the right, but not the obligation, to buy or sell a certain
amount of some asset at a specific price on or before a specific date.
For example, suppose you purchased an option to buy (a /call option/)
100 shares of XYZZY Corp. (the /underlying asset/) at $50 per share (the
/strike price/) up to some time 30 days from now (the /expiration/).
Also, suppose XYZZY is trading at $45. At any time right up to the
expiration, you could buy 100 shares of XYZZY, and, no matter how high
its price rises, you would pay $5000. You could also do nothing (a wise
move if the price never breaks $50). You could also sell this /option
contract/ to someone else before it expires. But suppose the price per
share rose to $75. If you decided to /exercise/ your option, you would,
for a $25/share discount, become the proud owner of 100 shares of XYZZY.
If you then immediately sold, you would walk away with $2500, less
commissions, taxes, and whatever you paid for the contract in the first
place (called the /premium/).

Now, what is a fair premium to pay to play this game? This is hardly a
trivial question, and people have spilled barrels of ink attempting to
answer it and lost entire fortunes getting it wrong. The approach we'll
focus on today is the [[https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/BOPM][Binomial
Options Pricing Model]] (BOPM).

Below,

1. We'll discuss the mathematics of the BOPM;
2. Implement a naïve routine based on our analysis;
3. Refine our analysis of the problem and use it to gain useful
   performance;
4. Discuss the principles of dynamic programming; and,
5. Use the traditional dynamic programming mindset to improve
   performance yet again.
   
** Analysis of the BOPM
   :PROPERTIES:
   :CUSTOM_ID: analysis-of-the-bopm
   :END:

At any given time up to expiration, the value of an option is the
greater of:

- the expected payoff from exercising it immediately, or,
- the expected payoff from continuing to hold it until some later time

discounted by the
[[https://www.investopedia.com/terms/r/risk-freerate.asp][/risk free
rate/]] (the theoretical return on an investment with no risk). At
expiration, we may exercise the option or let it expire. What we choose
at any given time is ultimately due to the expected behavior of the
underlying asset, without which options are meaningless. We'll start by
modeling the underlying's behavior.

Suppose we divide time into discrete trading days, and at the end of
each day $n$, the price of the underlying may go up or down by some
factor $u_n$ or $d_n$, respectively. Then the /spot price/ at the
beginning of the next day, $S_{n+1}$, is

[[./aux/2018-03-08-options-valuation_3_0.png]]

If we further assume that, every step, there is a probability $p_n$ of an
upward movement, then, in combination with what we have so far, we can
generate a tree of prices over a period of time. For simplicity, let's
consider an option that expires in three days:

[[./aux/2018-03-08-options-valuation_5_0.png]]

As the underlying asset's value changes, so does the value of our call
option. So, if tomorrow the underlying's value drops, so does the
option's. At expiration, we have a choice to make: We can either
exercise the option, or not. The value of the option at expiration is
the discount that we achieve when we exercise, or 0 if no discount is
possible. So,

[[./aux/2018-03-08-options-valuation_7_0.png]]

So, after a sequence of going up, then down and down, the spot price
will be

[[./aux/2018-03-08-options-valuation_9_0.png]]

And the value of the option on that day, if events play out that way,
would be determined solely by the strike price's relationship to the
spot price. But what about the day before? At that point, the future
underlying value is still unknown, but we have those probabilities to
guide us: we can compute an expecation of tomorrow's value (assuming we
hold), and compare it to today's value (assuming we exercise). Using the
same path in the tree, but stopping the day before expiration, the spot
price is:

[[./aux/2018-03-08-options-valuation_11_0.png]]

Tomorrow, the value of the option may rise or fall in accordance with
the underlying's value; applying the probability $p_{n-1}$ of an upward
movement today,

[[./aux/2018-03-08-options-valuation_13_0.png]]

Today's value is then:

[[./aux/2018-03-08-options-valuation_15_0.png]]

We can apply this all the way back to today to determine its fair value.
There's just one more thing to take into account: Option valuation is
done in comparison with a hypothetical "risk free" investment. If you
invest an initial amount of money $P_0$ for an annual rate of $r$ per
year, then after $t$ years your total value is given by the formula for
continuous compounding:

[[./aux/2018-03-08-options-valuation_17_0.png]]

Now, suppose you were quoted the value of that investment at some point
in the future $t$; what would that mean in today's terms? Another way to
phrase this is, how much would you have to invest now to have attained
that value at that point? Well, rearranging for $P_0$,

[[./aux/2018-03-08-options-valuation_19_0.png]]

This gives the value of $P(t)$
[[https://www.investopedia.com/terms/d/discounting.asp][/discounted/]]
to today by the expected return rate. Modifying our formula for today's
option value,

[[./aux/2018-03-08-options-valuation_21_0.png]]

where $\Delta t$ is the fraction of the compounding period that one day
represents.

** Implementation
   :PROPERTIES:
   :CUSTOM_ID: implementation
   :END:

We now have enough to write some code. First, we'll model the price of
the underlying asset:

#+BEGIN_SRC python
from math import *

class asset:
    def __init__(self, price, u, d, dt=1, r=1):
        self.price = price
        self.u, self.d = u, d    
        self.dt = dt
            
        self.r = r
        self.p = (exp(r * dt) - self.d) / (self.u - self.d)
    
    def reprice(self, price):
        return asset(price, self.u, self.d, self.dt, self.r)
    
    def up(self): return self.reprice(self.price * self.u)
    def down(self): return self.reprice(self.price * self.d)

# allow asset up/down factors stated in terms of volatility
def assetv(price, vol, dt=1, r=1):
    u = exp(vol * sqrt(dt))
    d = 1/u
    return asset(price, u, d, dt=dt, r=r)
#+END_SRC

And then we'll model the option in terms of an underlying asset:

#+BEGIN_SRC python
def optval(underlying, strike, t_exp, t=0, put=False):
    if t > t_exp: return 0
    
    ex_call = underlying.price - strike
    ex_put  = -ex_call
    exercise = ex_put if put else ex_call
    
    dt = underlying.dt
    C_up = optval(underlying.up(),   strike, t_exp, t + dt, put)
    C_dn = optval(underlying.down(), strike, t_exp, t + dt, put)
    
    p = underlying.p
    
    E_C_next = p * C_up + (1 - p) * C_dn
    E_C_next_d = E_C_next / exp(underlying.r * dt)
    
    return max(E_C_next_d, exercise)
#+END_SRC

If we were being absolutely scrupulous about modeling concepts, we'd
create a =market= class to which any number of assets and options could
be added. An instance of =market= would set the risk free rate, and the
securities that it contains would be created with the market as context
and, thus, have access to that rate. In addition, the market's risk free
rate could vary over time and all the securities in the market would
respond. While that level of modeling would be a great deal of fun, at
the moment it is well beyond the scope of this article.

Suppose in our ambition we want to use a scale of one trading day; there
are 252 trading days on average in one year, so =dt = 1/252=. How long
does it take to value an option that expires in five trading days? Ten?
Thirty? We'll start small. First, let's represent XYZZY:

#+BEGIN_SRC python
SPOT = 45
STRIKE = 50
a = asset(SPOT, 1.01, 0.99, dt=1/252, r=0.06)
#+END_SRC

Now let's see how long it takes to value options with different
expirations in the near future:

[[./aux/2018-03-08-options-valuation_29_0.png]]

We can tell by inspection that the time complexity of our code is
exponential. Extrapolating, we can estimate the time to value a thirty
day option at 2.03 hours; a ninety day option we could value in 260.66
million millenia. When determining the value of an option takes longer
than the option's lifetime, something clearly has to change. We can
either use a coarser evaluation interval (given considerations of
numerical stability, this may not be unreasonable) or look for an
algorithmic speedup. Let's go for the algorithmic speedup.

First off, note that we used constant factors for $u(t)$ and $d(t)$.
Because of that, it makes no difference whether the spot price moves
down and then up or up and then down; indeed, the only thing that
matters at all is the total number of upward and downward movements.
Thus, we can collapse the internal structure of our price tree:

[[./aux/2018-03-08-options-valuation_32_0.png]]

Where the probability of an upward (rightward) movement is $p$ and that
of a downward (leftward) movement is $1−p$.

While the total number of nodes in the original price tree varied
exponentially with the number of steps, the number of nodes in our new
tree varies quadratically. It's also clear that our original code is
doing a fantastic amount of rework. How can we fix this? Let's maintain
a cache of the valuations at each node as we go along, and reuse them as
opportunities arise; this tactic is called /memoization/.

#+BEGIN_SRC python
cache = {}
def optval2(underlying, strike, t_exp, t=0, put=False):
    global cache
    if t > t_exp: return 0
    
    key = (t, underlying.price)
    if key in cache: return cache[key]
    
    ex_call = underlying.price - strike
    ex_put  = -ex_call
    exercise = ex_put if put else ex_call
    
    dt = underlying.dt
    C_up = optval2(underlying.up(),   strike, t_exp, t + dt, put)
    C_dn = optval2(underlying.down(), strike, t_exp, t + dt, put)
    
    p = underlying.p
    
    E_C_next = p * C_up + (1 - p) * C_dn
    E_C_next_d = E_C_next / exp(underlying.r * dt)
    
    cache[key] = max(E_C_next_d, exercise)
    return cache[key]
#+END_SRC

And memoization in this instance is a fantastic time saver:

[[./aux/2018-03-08-options-valuation_36_0.png]]

With that, we can easily determine that the value of such an option
expiring in 90 days is $0.46 per share, and we can learn this in 452.76
ms.

** Dynamic Programming
   :PROPERTIES:
   :CUSTOM_ID: dynamic-programming
   :END:

Now that we've achieved an impressive speedup over the original version,
let's take a step back and look at what's going on. Firstly, the
valuation problem can be decomposed into shorter-term valuation
problems, and we then combine the solutions to those problems to arrive
at an overall solution. When a problem can be solved recursively in this
manner, we say that it has /optimal substructure/. This property is what
led us to the original recursive solution in the first place.

Next, we made a number of simplifications (namely, holding $u$, $d$, and
$p$ constant over time rather than letting them vary) that, together,
allowed us to collapse the tree of subproblems into the binary lattice
that we saw. Whenever we see more than one path to any particular
subproblem, we say that there exist /overlapping subproblems/; the more
prevalent they are, the more benefit is to be had from caching and
reusing intermediate results. In the case of our valuation problem, the
number of paths into each level of the lattice grows quadratically with
depth; that high degree of overlap is the source of the speedup that
memoization netted us.

In a nutshell, the family of problem solving strategies revolving around
reusing the intermediate results that arise from the overlapping
subproblems of a problem that has optimal substructure is
[[https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dynamic_programming][/dynamic
programming/]], and it finds use in such disparate domains as finance,
bioinformatics, and software engineering.

The specific approach that we used, wherein a recursive solution
combines results from deeper in the problem lattice, is top-down dynamic
programming. While the top-down forumulation is certainly elegant, still
better performance can be attained from a bottom-up iterative approach,
where processing explicitly proceeds from the smallest subproblems to
the next smallest and so on to the finished result, with a table or
other convenient structure being used to maintain the intermediate
results as they are built. In fact, when we discuss dynamic programming
algorithms, it's often the bottom up style that we have in mind. Rather
than the divide-and-conquer mindset of the recursive approach, in the
bottom-up version we explicitly start with the smallest parts of the
problem and systematically build up to the complete solution.

For the option valuation problem, a bottom-up solution might look like:

#+BEGIN_SRC python
def optval3(underlying, strike, t_exp, t=0, put=False):
    t_exp = int((t_exp - t) / a.dt)
    spot = underlying.price
    p = underlying.p
    u = underlying.u
    d = underlying.d
    
    # there's no value in holding past expiration
    C = [0 for i in range(t_exp + 2)]
    disc = exp(a.r * a.dt)
    
    exval_call = lambda Nu, i: spot * u**Nu * d**(i - Nu) - strike
    exval_put = lambda Nu, i: -exval_call(Nu, i)
    exval = exval_put if put else exval_call
    
    for i in range(t_exp, -1, -1):
        xs = (max(0, exval(Nu, i)) for Nu in range(i+1))
        hs = (((1 - p) * C[i] + p * C[i + 1]) / disc for i in range(len(C) - 1))
        
        # we only need sub-valuations one day in advance
        C = list(map(max, xs, hs))
        
    return C[0]
#+END_SRC

And though the computational complexity is still quadratic, it exhibits
a clear performance advantage over the memoized implementation:

[[./aux/2018-03-08-options-valuation_43_0.png]]

Now we can compute the 90-day option's value in only 4.69 ms;
furthermore, we can find the value of an option expiring in 180 days
($1.30) in only 16.92 ms.

** Wrapping Up
   :PROPERTIES:
   :CUSTOM_ID: wrapping-up
   :END:

Why does this matter? Well, for one, options serve a vital role in the
world of finance, and being able to determine the fair value of an
option quickly is of great practical value. More importantly for us,
though, examining one way of modeling this problem in some detail led us
into a powerful approach to tackling a wide array of real world
problems. We'll surely revisit dynamic programming in the near future.
